Have you experienced an unexpected financial setback?
Is your child struggling to resist peer pressure
or unwholesome influences from the Internet?
Have you been diagnosed with a life-threatening disease?
Life in this wicked system can seem like a dark wilderness
that we may feel alone discouraged
and we just don't know where to turn.
This is why more than ever,
we need to strengthen our faith in God's Word.
When we study the Bible and take it to heart,
our faith in God grows and something amazing happens.
Let's find out what that is.
First Thessalonians chapter 2, and let's read verse 13.
First Thessalonians 2, 13.
Indeed, that is why we also thank God unceasingly
because when you received God's Word,
which you heard from us,
you accepted it not as the Word of men,
but just as it truthfully is as the Word of God,
which is also at work in new believers.
How does God's Word work in us?
It has already transformed us into faithful servants of Jehovah God,
but it also gives us the power to remain strong
under difficult circumstances.
This subject is timely because we live in a world
where so many plant seeds have doubt about the Bible.
They say it is something outdated or inaccurate.
It is our determination not to allow the world's mistaken views
to erode our faith in the Bible.
In this talk, we're going to look at three proofs
to help us maintain our love and confidence in God's inspired Word.
It's prophecies, what it says about the earth,
and it's survival against all odds.
Let's take the first point, Bible prophecies.
Beyond man's reach is the ability to foresee the future in detail.
Only Almighty God can do this.
For example, secular history tells us that in the year 539 BCE,
a man named Cyrus conquered the land of Babylon
and allowed thousands of Jewish captives to return home
to restore true worship in Jerusalem.
The Bible also tells us about these events
with one notable exception.
While secular history recounts these events after they happened,
the Bible foretold these events before they took place.
In fact, some 200 years before.
Let's take a closer look and see for ourselves.
Let's turn to Isaiah, chapter 44.
Isaiah, chapter 44, and we're going to read verses 27 and 28.
And as we read these verses,
please take special notice of how many times the Word will appear.
The one saying to the deep waters, be evaporated,
and I will dry up your rivers.
The one saying of Cyrus, he is my shepherd,
and he will completely carry out all my will.
The one saying of Jerusalem, she will be rebuilt,
and of the temple, your foundation will be laid.
This isn't Jehovah God just guessing
or trying to figure out the future.
He's decided what will happen and he will make it happen.
How could the Bible predict this kind of detail
some 200 years in advance?
There is only one explanation.
Turn a couple of chapters over to Isaiah, chapter 46,
and let's read verse 10.
From the beginning, I foretell the outcome.
And from long ago, the things that have not yet been done.
I say, my decision will stand,
and I will do whatever I please.
It's fulfilled prophecies like these
that build trust and confidence in God's Word.
Now another reason we have faith in the Bible
is because of what it says about the earth.
Let's consider an example at Job, chapter 26,
and let's read verse 7.
Job, chapter 26, and verse 7.
He stretches out the northern sky over empty space,
suspending the earth upon nothing.
Now this was stated some 3,500 years ago.
Job statement would have appeared ridiculous
to the Greek philosopher, Aristotle,
who taught that an object must rest upon
or be attached to something or else it will fall.
It was not until 1687
that the scientist Isaac Newton explained
that the earth is held in orbit by an invisible force
appearing as if it were suspended on nothing.
Now how did the Bible know the truth
more than 3,000 years ago?
The answer,
it is the Word of God,
and God cannot lie.
Let's take our third line of evidence,
and that is the Bible's survival.
Although the original books of the Bible have disappeared,
accurate copies of the Bible manuscripts
have survived to our day,
despite natural decay, fierce opposition,
and deliberate tampering with its message.
Isaiah chapter 40 in verse 8 tells us,
the Word of our God,
endures forever.
The Bible has not endured,
as a mere museum display,
its message has endured.
That inspired message has been conveyed
in over 3,000 languages.
This is irrefutable proof of its divine origin.
The following video presents additional evidence
that the Bible is God's Word.
Please pay attention to this.
The Bible is a book of facts.
It's about real people,
real events, real history, and real places.
In the Hebrew scriptures,
there are at least 53 people confirmed archaeologically.
One example is Pharaoh Shishak of Egypt.
The Bible mentions his invasion of Judah,
specifically dating it
in the fifth year of Judean king Rehupua.
For a long time,
the only record of that invasion
was the one found in the Bible.
Then, a relief on the wall of a temple
at Karnak, Egypt, was discovered,
depicting Shishak with captives.
It also records names of conquered Israelite towns,
many of which have been identified with biblical sites.
It also mentions the field of Abram,
the earliest reference in Egyptian records
to the biblical patriarch Abram.
This strengthens our confidence in faith
in the Bible as God's Word.
The Bible was written on perishable materials,
such as papyrus and parchment.
While no originals are known to exist today,
the number of ancient copies available now
is staggering,
some 11,000 Hebrew and Greek manuscripts,
more than for any other ancient piece of literature.
By comparing the earliest,
most authoritative manuscripts,
scholars can identify inaccuracies
and mistakes that have crept in.
But the vast majority of differences
do not change the meaning at all.
One example is found at Luke 417,
which says that Jesus opened the skull of Isaiah.
But some manuscripts say that he unrolled the skull.
But isn't the meaning the same?
God's message has even survived changes in language.
Writers of the Christian Greek scriptures
quoted the Hebrew scriptures,
but often from the Greek Septuric translation.
At times, they paraphrased such quotations
using slightly different wording,
but the message remained the same.
And most of Jesus' words,
likely spoken in 1st century Hebrew,
were recorded in Greek.
Still, his message is clear.
Today, at least parts of God's word
can be read in more than 3,000 languages.
The Bible's survival reveals a puzzling paradox.
Throughout history, people were willing to die
to preserve the Bible and make it available to everyone.
Others were willing to kill,
to prevent access to it and wipe it out of existence.
Why?
It's the book's content.
God's word is alive,
and exerts power.
It changes people's lives in ways that some welcome,
but others resist violently at times.
For example, responding to Roman Emperor Diocletians
edict in 3 or 3 CE
to destroy the sacred scriptures by fire,
Felix, the bishop of Tibyuka, reportedly said,
it is better for me to be burned than the sacred scriptures.
He paid with his life.
Efforts to destroy God's message for mankind continue today,
but the word of our God endures forever.
Wasn't that faith strengthening to see more evidence
that the Bible is God's word?
How can we strengthen our conviction in God's word?
We can do so by creating study projects to build our faith.
One fascinating project involves the prophecy
at Genesis chapter 3 and verse 15.
Perhaps you can quote it by heart,
but have you ever sat down and taken the time to make a timeline?
Listing key scriptures that show how God bit by bit
shed light on the individuals
and the arrangement referred to in this verse.
When we take time to really study the Bible
and meditate on these golden threads running through the Bible,
our faith in God's word will be strengthened.
Have you had doubts about something?
Then write it down.
Then use our research tools such as the study Bible,
JW Library, watch our online library to dig deeper.
It's worth the effort.
And if you're a parent,
help your children come to know
and fall in love with the author of the Bible.
We are so close to begin the real life in the new world,
now is the time to strengthen our trust and confidence in the Bible.
When we have strong faith in God's word,
we can feel as did our young brother Ruslan,
from Turkmenistan,
who faces his second prison term because of his faith.
He declared,
I have strong faith that Jehovah will reward me
where there is a strong hope,
there is endless joy,
where there is joy,
there is strength and endurance,
and a strong person can never be broken.
You too will never be broken
if you maintain your faith in God's word.
Brother Samuel heard of the governing body
will now present the next talk on this symposium,
why we have faith in God's moral standards.